# DeepSpa
## 1.Introduction
This repository includes a learning-based cell segmentation tool for DeepSpa, which analyzes subcellular resolution spatial transcriptomics. To enhance the user experience, we have provided example data within this project. For more details, please refer to the "Example Data" section. **If you are looking for a tutorial on nuclear segmentation training, you can find it in the "Nuclear_segmentation_model/README.md" file**.
## 2.Prerequisites
To install requirements:  
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```  
- Python 3.8.13  
- GPU Memory: 3GB+

**Note: Please download the pre training weights from https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1nhc-Cy8ScGtekdCRjtVbvxkAYxo_hki1 before use. Do not modify the name of the weights and place them into the ./haha/deep_learning_model/final_model directory.** 
## 3.Tutorial
### Directory structure of input data
The sections are numerically named, starting from 1 for the top layer. The DAPI images are in TIFF, PNG, or JPEG format, while the RNA coordinate file must be in CSV format.The directory structure is as follows:  


- all
  - 1 
    - DAPI.tif
    - rna_coordinate.csv
  - 2 
    - DAPI.tif 
    - rna_coordinate.csv
  - 3
    - DAPI.tif 
    - rna_coordinate.csv  


### Format of input data
(1) DAPI.tif: DAPI images  

(2) rna_coordinate.csv: RNA molecules infomation   
<div align="center">
  
| index | gene | row | col | num |
| ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |
| 0 | gene 1 | 1 | 100 | 2 |
| 1 | gene 2 | 4 | 239 | 3 |
| 2 | gene 1 | 100 | 590 | 5 |

</div>


- `gene`: gene name
  
- `row`: row coordinate of transcript
  
- `col`: column coordinate of transcript
  
- `num`: number of transcript in spot for based-NGS spatial transcriptomics. The based-imaging spatial transcriptomics doesn't need "num".
  
(3) sc_data_path: The Sc-RNA data ,csv file , used in tangram for cell type annotation.
<div align="center">
  
| index | cell_type | gene 1 | gene 2 | ...  | gene n |
| ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |
| 0 | cell_type 1 | 0 | 10 | ... | 2 |
| 1 | cell_type 2 | 4 | 23 | ... | 4 |
| 2 | cell_type 1 | 10 | 50 | ... | 8 |

</div>  


### Input parameter  

The Configration.toml include all parameter in runing. 

- `data_path`: the directory of input data

- `output_path`: the directory of output data
  
- `seg_threshold`: segmnetation threshold. lower values will generate more cell.

- `seg_mode`: segmentation mode. 1: original DAPI as input. 2:The DAPI image is divided into small images of 512 * 512 as input

- `device`: Using GPU or CPU, GPU is faster. 

- `section_align_flag`: whether need to align section. 0:NO 1:YES

- `filter_mode`: Nuclear filtration mode. 1: Filter by diameter 2: Filter by cell distribution.

- `top_value`: 1: Filter by diameter. The maximum radius of a nucleus, in px. or  2: Filter by cell distribution. Top percentage.ascend order

- `bottom_value`: 1: Filter by diameter. The minimum radius of a nucleus, in px. or 2: Filter by cell distribution. Bottom percentage.ascend order

- `gray_value_threshold`: # The DAPI image will be subtracted from this value to reduce impact of overexposure.

- `maximum_cell_radius`: # The maximum radius of a cell, in px, control size of cell.

- `cell_express_min_number`: # The manimun value of cell expression, and cells below this value will be filtered.

- `cell_express_max_number` # The maximum value of cell expression, and cells above this value will be filtered. if this value is 0, this parameter is invalid

- `cell_type_annotation_mode`: # cell type nnotation mode. 1:tangram 2:clustering

- `sc_data_path`: # The single cell expression matrix applied in tangram.

- `K`: # Number of neighboring cells in find anatomic region

- `anatomic_region_num`: # The number of anatomic region

### Running
**Note**: The **main_1.py** and **main_2.py** of DeepSpa supports Linux, MacOS and Windows platform, but **3D_point_cloud.py** only support in MacOS or Windows platform.If running on MacOS or Windows platform, please pay attention to the path format.  
After selecting all parameter value, the cell segmentation will be executed by running the following command.

```
python main_1.py --c ./Configration.toml
```

If `cell_type_annotation_mode=2`,using traditional clustering for cell type annotation ,you will need to execute the following command.

```
python main_2.py --c ./Configration.toml
```

You can use point cloud by running the following command in **local terminal(MacOS or Windows platform)** for 3D reconstruction including 3D surface of tissue/organ and 3D visualization of cell type and anatomic region.
```
python 3D_point_cloud.py --c ./Configration.toml --m all
```

### Example data
The example_data folder contains three successive tissue sections from the mouse olfactory bulb generated by in situ sequencing technology. The example_sc_data folder contain single cell sequencing data of the mouse olfactory bulb, including cell expression matrix and cell types. **example_Configration.toml** contains all parameters that have been filled in. Please run the following code directly:

```
python main_1.py --c ./example_Configration.toml
```

Then, you can use point cloud by running the following command in local terminal for 3D reconstruction including 3D surface of tissue/organ and 3D visualization of cell type and anatomic region.

```
python 3D_point_cloud.py --c ./example_Configration.toml --m all
```
